Accounting for structural change has always been an important issue in economics
and elsewhere. However, because of major events such as the 2007–2008 global ﬁnan-
cial crisis, the 2007–2010 subprime mortgage crisis, the 2016 Brexit referendum, the 2020
COVID–19 outbreak, and the 2022 war in Ukraine, interest has recently intensiﬁed.
The time series literature concerned with the estimation and testing for breaks is huge,
and there is by now considerable accumulated empirical evidence of breaks in all kinds
of economic relationships, especially in macroeconomics and ﬁnance (see, for example,
Stock and Watson, 1996, 2003). Most of this evidence is based on econometric techniques
requiring that there is (at most) one break (see, for example, Andrews, 1993). However,
there are also techniques that allow for an unknown number of breaks, which is typically
the most relevant scenario in practice. The single most important contribution in this area
is Bai and Perron (1998), “BP98” henceforth, who develop a complete toolbox for testing
and dating multiple (discrete) breaks in linear time series regression models. The toolbox
includes (i) a number of tests for the presence of breaks, including a sequential test pro-
cedure to estimate the number of breaks, (ii) a breakpoint estimator, and (iii) a breakpoint
conﬁdence interval. The toolbox is widely applicable, it is computationally attractive, and
it is readily available in many software programmes, such as GAUSS, EViews, MATLAB,
R and most recently Stata (see Ditzen et al., 2022). It is therefore very popular. This is
true not only among empirical economists but also among econometricians for which the
BP98 study has provided a launching pad for countless extensions (see the 2021 Journal
of Econometrics special issue in honor of Pierre Perron for overviews of some of these
works). Even today, more then two decades after its publication, the BP98 toolbox re-
mains the workhorse of the literature. It has therefore stood the test of time.
Panel data relationships are particularly susceptible to breaks, because of the number
of series they contain. In fact, if one admits to the possibility that single time series may
be subject to breaks, the likelihood of having at least one breaking series in a panel will by
2

construction increase as more series are added. This fact is by now well understood in the
econometric literature, and it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd empirical evidence in its support (see
Antoch et al., 2019, Boldea et al., 2020, Kaddoura and Westerlund, 2022, Karavias et al.,
2022, and Zhu et al., 2020, to mention a few). Yet, it is not until recently that tools designed
to estimate and test for breaks in panel data regression models have become available to
practitioners. Most of these tools are constrained to single break environments (see, for
example, Antoch et al., 2019, Baltagi et al., 2016, 2017, Karavias et al., 2022, and Zhu et
al., 2020). Boldea et al. (2020), Kaddoura and Westerlund (2022), and Qian and Su (2016)
allow for multiple breaks, and are therefore more general in this regard. However, this
generality comes at a cost in terms of the allowable unobserved heterogeneity, which
is important as unattended heterogeneity can be mistaken for breaks (and vice versa).
In particular, while Qian and Su (2016) allow for individual ﬁxed effects, Boldea et al.
(2020), and Kaddoura and Westerlund (2022) assume that the unobserved heterogeneity
is made up of a special type of interactive random effects that basically can be ignored
in the estimation. Li et al. (2016) allow for more general interactive effects and multiple
breaks that are dealt with using a version of the (group fused) least absolute shrinkage
and selection operator (LASSO) method. As far as we are aware, this is the most general
approach available at the moment. The use of the LASSO does, however, make for a
rather complicated estimation problem that is not only nonlinear but that also involves a
number of tuning parameters.1It has therefore not received much attention in the applied
literature.
In the present paper we take the above observations as a source of inspiration for de-
veloping the ﬁrst fully ﬂedged panel extension of BP98’s time series toolbox, which as
1In the LASSO of Li et al. (2016) researchers need to specify a penalty tuning parameter, an adaptive
weight, a shrinking threshold, and the number of factors. As is well known, performance can be very sen-
sitive to choices of this type. Some can be made in a data-driven fashion using information criteria but then
the use of such criteria in turn requires other choices, including a penalty scaling factor, the penalty itself
and a suitable grid for the parameter search. Moreover, since the LASSO requires numerical optimization,
the use of data-driven tuning parameter selection makes the procedure computationally very burdensome.
The same is true for the LASSO considered by Kaddoura and Westerlund (2022).
3

already pointed out provides a natural starting point.2The model that we consider for
this purpose, laid out in Section 2, is very general and allows not only multiple structural
breaks but also interactive effects.3As we explain in detail in Section 3, in contrast to Li
et al. (2016), the estimation of the interactive effects, the breaks and the model parame-
ters is not carried out jointly but sequentially in two steps, which enables us to separate
the breaks from the effects. We begin by estimating and removing the interactive effects,
which is done using a version of the so-called “common correlated effects” (CCE) ap-
proach, which is simple to implement, computationally fast and with good small-sample
properties. With the interactive effects gone, in the second step we apply a panel version
of BP98’s toolbox to the resulting cleaned up regression. Our theoretical results, also re-
ported in Section 3, show that the toolbox is asymptotically valid, a result that is veriﬁed
in small samples in a Monte Carlo study reported in the online appendix.
While the US economy has been struck by several major events in the past 15 years, the
2007–2008 global ﬁnancial crisis and the 2020 COVID–19 outbreak have been particularly
disruptive. In both cases the Federal Reserve’s policy response was the use of a series of
large-scale asset purchase programs, or “quantitative easing” (QE) rounds, whose useful-
ness to this date is debated. In Section 4, we evaluate whether these rounds achieved their
primary goal of spurring credit ﬂow in the economy. The idea here is that effective QE
policies would cause breaks in the banks’ lending behaviour, which can be detected using
the proposed break toolbox. The attractiveness of this methodology over the otherwise
so common difference-in-difference (DiD) approach is threefold. First, both the timing of
2The paper that is closest to ours in terms of the techniques used is that of Karavias et al. (2022).
As already pointed out, however, they only allow for one break, which is unlikely to be enough in most
scenarios of empirical relevance. Moreover, most of their theoretical results assume that Tis ﬁxed, which
is very different from the large- Ttheory provided in the present paper. Their empirical application to the
relationship between stock returns and COVID-19 is also completely different from ours. The two papers
are therefore clearly distinct.
3In this paper, we follow BP98 and assume that breaks are discrete. This is not necessary, though, and
there are papers that consider smooth breaks (see, for example, Chen and Huang, 2018, and Feng et al.,
2017). Most economic data sets do, however, have relatively low frequency of observation, which means
that even if breaks are smooth they will appear as discrete. Discrete breaks are therefore empirically highly
relevant, which is presumably also one of the reasons for why they are so popular in applied work.
4

the breaks and their number can be determined from the data. This is important because
the QE rounds differed in policy mix, duration and magnitude, and there were also other
policy actions such as maturity extension programs, mid-cycle expansions and taperings.
It is therefore not clear where the effects of these rounds begin and end, or if they are
absent altogether. Second, the toolbox is robust to the presence of interactive effects. This
is important because many policy actions were taken based on current and anticipated
macroeconomic conditions, which if not properly accounted for may well be mistaken
for policy-induced breaks. Third, by identifying policy through breaks, we avoid the
usual problem of having to deﬁne suitable treatment and control groups, which in the
current context is non-trivial, as all banks are effected by QE to some extent.
The sample that we use covers 3,557 banks across 64 quarters, from 2005Q3 to 2021Q3.
According to the results, bank lending has suffered from a number of breaks that can
be attributed to the Federal Reserve’s QE interventions. However, a majority of these
did not have the intended expansionary effect, but rather banks took the opportunity to
build up reserves in order to meet their capitalisation requirements. The main exception
occurs towards the end of the sample, a period that includes the COVID–19 outbreak. At
this point in time, the health of the banking sector had improved substantially, and the
subsequent interventions were large enough for banks to be able to expand lending while
at the same time cover their capitalisation needs. The net effect over the whole sample
period is that lending has increased, but just barely.
Section 5 concludes. All proofs and theoretical results of secondary nature are pro-
vided in the online appendix, which also contains the results of a small-scale Monte Carlo
study. In a companion paper, Ditzen et al. (2022) present a new Stata command, called
xtbreak , for implementing the new toolbox. The command uses the dynamic program-
ming algorithm presented in Section 3.2 to efﬁciently estimate the break dates. The algo-
rithm requires at most O(T2)least-squares operations for any number of breaks.
5