4.1. Motivation
Since the 2007–2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, monetary policy has been close to the zero
lower bound in many countries. As a consequence, central banks have turned toward un-
conventional monetary policy as a means to stimulate their economies. Among several
measures available, the main policy instrument has been QE. The US Federal Reserve, in
particular, has implemented at least four major rounds of QE through which they pur-
chased US Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) from the commercial bank-
ing sector, with the aim of boosting lending and stimulating economic activity. The most
well-known are the “QE1”, “QE2” and “QE3” rounds that took place in the aftermath of
the global ﬁnancial crisis. QE1 was announced in November 2008 and lasted until June
2010, and was followed by QE2, which spanned the period November 2010–June 2011.
QE3 began in September 2012 and ended in October 2014. The fourth and most recent
QE round is the one initiated in March 2020 as a response to the COVID–19 pandemic,
henceforth labelled “QE4”.
A common feature of QE1–QE4 is that they are massive in scale. As a reﬂection of
this, the Federal Reserve balance sheet increased from about USD 800 billion in 2007 to
over USD 8.5 trillion in 2021. This is clearly visible in Figure 1, which plots the Federal
Reserve Treasury and MBS holdings over time, together with the QE dates. Because of
their magnitude, the effect of these QEs on the banking sector has attracted considerable
interest, so much so that there is by now a separate literature devoted to them.
INSERT FIGURE 1ABOUT HERE
Interestingly enough, however, while massive indeed, so far the empirical evidence
regarding the effectiveness of QE has been mixed and far from conclusive. Rodnyanski
and Darmouni (2017) were among the ﬁrst to examine the ﬁrst three QE rounds jointly.
They found that banks with relatively larger holdings of MBSs expanded lending, but
25

only during QE1 and QE3, because QE2 targeted Treasuries which were sparsely held by
banks. Similar results have later been reported by Luck and Zimmermann (2020). Kapoor
and Peia (2021) also study QE1–QE3. According to their results, however, only QE3 had
a strong effect on liquidity creation. This last ﬁnding is in turn markedly different from
that of Chakraborty et al. (2020), who document a negative effect of QE3 on commercial
and industrial (C&I) lending. For the most recent QE4 round there is to the best of our
knowledge no evidence at all.
The present paper is the ﬁrst to consider all four rounds. This is our ﬁrst contribu-
tion. Our second contribution lies in our choice of econometric method. The standard
approach in the literature is to exploit differences in exposure to QE policies across banks.
The basic idea is to split the sample of banks into a treatment and a control group, where
the former is assumed to be relatively more exposed to QE policy. Given that the Federal
Reserve bought large quantities of mainly MBSs during the QE rounds, the argument goes
on to say that banks with relatively large MBS holdings should beneﬁt more, and hence
be more exposed. The effect of QE policy is then estimated via a standard DiD regression
in which banks’ lending is regressed onto a dummy variable that takes on the value one
whenever a bank that belongs to the treatment group has been subject to a particular QE
policy and zero otherwise, control variables, and bank and time ﬁxed effects.
While popular, the standard DiD approach to QE evaluation has (at least) two draw-
backs. One drawback is that ﬁxed effects are highly restrictive in that they require that
in the absence of treatment the difference between the treatment and control groups is
constant over time. This is the so-called “parallel trend” condition, which has attracted
considerable attention in the QE literature (see, for example, Di Maggio et al., 2020, Luck
and Zimmermann, 2020, and Rodnyanski and Darmouni, 2017). The reason is that banks
with higher exposure to QE may be lending to ﬁrms that experience faster credit demand
growth due to improvements in their borrower health. Changes in the demand for credit
may therefore cause the treatment and control groups to differ systematically over time
26

even in absence of QE. Demand-side effects is one source of non-parallel trending, but
there are others, such as aggregate macroeconomic conditions and omitted variables (see,
for example, Di Maggio et al., 2020, and Kapoor and Peia, 2021, for discussions). This
is important because if the parallel trend condition is violated the OLS estimator is no
longer consistent.
Another drawback of the DiD approach is that it requires correct speciﬁcation not only
of the timing of the QEs but also of the treatment and control groups, both of which are
key in the construction of the treatment dummy. As mentioned earlier, existing studies
focus on QE1–QE3, leaving “Operation Twist”, the QE1 rollover, QE extensions and other
sizeable purchases which the Federal Reserve conducted outside the QE rounds out of
the analysis. Furthermore, the rounds were lengthy and contained periods with varying
degree of asset purchases, and it is not clear if their impact began with the announcements
(see Luck and Zimmermann, 2020).
If it is difﬁcult to get the timing of the QEs right, correct speciﬁcation of the treatment
and control groups is literally impossible, given that strictly speaking there is no control
group, since all banks are exposed to QE to some extent (see Chakraborty et al., 2020, and
Luck and Zimmermann, 2020). The standard approach is to measure banks’ exposure to
QE by their MBS holdings, and to deﬁne the treatment and control groups as the upper
and lower quantiles of the MBS distribution (prior to QE1). This raises (at least) two con-
cerns; banks’ MBS holdings are likely an imperfect measure of their QE exposure, and the
choice of which quantiles to use is largely arbitrary. The treatment dummy is therefore
generally mismeasured, which is a major problem, commonly referred to as “misclassiﬁ-
cation”, because it makes the regression error correlated with the true outcome, thereby
rendering OLS inconsistent (see, for example, Mahajan, 2006).
The present paper is not the ﬁrst to point to these shortcomings, but it is the ﬁrst to
consider an econometric approach that is designed to deal with both in a rigorous way.
The convention in the literature is to employ a large battery of robustness checks intended
27

to demonstrate the validity of the conclusions. As is well known in the econometric lit-
erature, however, such checks are subject to numerous pitfalls, and can in fact be entirely
misleading. One example of such a pitfall is data snooping. In the words of Lu and
White (2014, page 200), “[b]y submitting only results that may have been arrived at by
speciﬁcation searches designed to produce plausible results passing robustness checks,
researchers can avoid having reviewers point out that this or that regression coefﬁcient
does not make sense or that the results might not be robust. And if this is enough to
satisfy naive reviewers, why take a chance? Performing further analyses that could po-
tentially reveal speciﬁcation problems, such as nonlinearity or exogeneity failure, is just
asking for trouble.” But even in the absence of such data snooping, it is important to
note that robustness checking is not a robust econometric approach, which in the current
context means an approach that is valid in the presence of uncertainty over the validity
of the parallel trend condition, the timing of the QE effects, and the speciﬁcation of the
treatment and control groups.
The toolbox developed in Section 3 allows for interactive effects in which there may
be individual unobserved heterogeneity that changes over time as a result of common
shocks. The parallel trend condition is therefore not required, which is a substantial ad-
vantage when compared to the standard DiD approach. Another advantage that we ex-
ploit in this section to identify the effect of QE on bank lending is that the toolbox can test
for and date multiple structural breaks. The previous literature measures banks’ expo-
sure to QE by their MBS holdings and therefore so do we. However, instead of recoding
it into a dummy variable for whether a particular bank belongs to the treatment or con-
trol group, we take the ratio as is and include it as a regressor with a potentially breaking
coefﬁcient. This makes our approach similar to those considered by Luck and Zimmer-
mann (2020), and Kapoor and Peia (2021), in which the treatment variable is the actual
MBS holdings multiplied by a dummy for each of the ﬁrst three rounds of QE. The main
difference is that here we treat the dates of any breaks as unknown to be estimated from
28

the data.
4.2. Data
The analysis is based on bank-level quarterly data taken from the Call Reports of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The initial sample is the universe of commer-
cial banks, observed from 2005Q3 to 2021Q3. The starting period coincides with the ﬁrst
Federal Reserve Treasury purchases. Following Rodnyanski and Darmouni (2017) and
others, we balance our sample, keeping only those banks for which we have observa-
tions for the whole time period to control for mergers or acquisitions. Many studies in
the literature aggregate their data to bank holding company level. However, whenever
tested, the results for the bank level data tend to be the same (see, for example, Rod-
nyanski and Darmouni, 2017). In the present paper, we therefore base our analysis on
this last type of data, which, in addition to being free of aggregation bias, contains a rel-
atively large number of observations. In particular, there are N=3, 557 banks that are
observed over T=64 quarters, for a total of 227, 648 bank-quarter observations, which
is substantially larger than many of the samples employed in the existing literature (see,
for example, Chakraborty et al., 2020, and Rodnyanski and Darmouni (2017). Note also
that while Tis large, Nis much larger, suggesting that our asymptotic theory based on
letting N,T!¥with T/N!0 should provide a very accurate approximation of the
behaviour of the proposed toolbox.
We employ the same three dependent variables ( yi,t) as in Luck and Zimmermann
(2020), Kapoor and Peia (2021), and Rodnyanski and Darmouni (2017). They are the loga-
rithm of (i) total loans, (ii) real estate (RE) loans and (iii) commercial and industrial (C&I)
loans. The main regressor of interest, whose coefﬁcient will be allowed to be breaking,
is banks’ MBS holdings. Unlike most existing studies, however, for reasons mentioned
earlier, we do not want to rely solely on MBS holdings as a measure of banks’ exposure
to QE. Because of the way that they enter the model as regressors with potentially break-
ing coefﬁcients, the proposed toolbox can easily accommodate additional measures. Rod-
29

nyanski and Darmouni (2017) consider Treasuries holdings as an alternative to MBS hold-
ings. According to their results, however, this measure is relatively unimportant, which
they explain by the fact that banks do not hold many Treasury securities. Chakraborty
et al. (2020) therefore suggest an alternative, indirect, measure of the effect of Treasury
purchases. In particular, they argue that banks with relatively high non-MBS securities
holdings should beneﬁt more from Treasury purchases lowering yields on these secu-
rities. In this section, we therefore include banks’ non-MBS securities holdings as an
additional measure of their exposure to QE. As usual in the literature, both measures are
normalised by total assets. Also, to reduce the risk of simultaneity, following Chakraborty
et al. (2020), all regressors are lagged once. Hence, in terms of the model in (2.1), wi,tis
lagged MBS and non-MBS holdings over total assets.
A number of bank-level controls are included to capture differences in the scale and
ﬁnancial position of banks that might affect their lending activity, again following the
convention in the literature. They are returns on assets (ROA), total assets, equity over
total assets, cash over total assets, cost of deposits, and net income. These are the variables
that go into xi,t. GDP and inﬂation growth are also included to control for macroeconomic
conditions and are treated as observed common factors, as discussed in Section 2.2. The
data for these last two variables are extracted from the FRED database of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
INSERT TABLES 1AND 2ABOUT HERE
Tables 1 and 2 provide a summary of each variable in the sample and some descriptive
statistics, respectively. One of the descriptives included is Pesaran’s (2021) CD test for the
presence of cross-sectional correlation. According to the test results, the null hypothesis
of no correlation is strongly rejected for all the bank-level variables, which is suggestive
of common factors, and hence of non-parallel trending. Thus, as Di Maggio et al. (2020)
point out, the parallel trend condition is unlikely to hold when using the type of long-
span panel data considered here.
30

4.3. Break testing and estimation
We ﬁrst want to test if there are any breaks present at all. Given that the QEs were of
different sizes and contained different policy mixes, we do not want to assume that all of
them led to breaks. This means that we want to treat the number of breaks as unknown.
For this reason, we employ the WDmax F(kmax)statistic, in which the null hypothesis of
no breaks is tested against the alternative of up to kmaxbreaks. Because the test outcome
was unaffected by the weighing, we set ca,1/ca,k=1. We also set kmax=9 and e=0.05,
which means that the critical values can be taken directly from Table I of BP98. The test
values for total, RE and C&I loans are 246.877, 97.722 and 28.671, respectively, which are
all larger than the appropriate critical value at the most conservative 1% level, 17.61.
The number of breaks turned out to be a difﬁcult object to estimate, which is partly
expected given the discussion in BP03. The main problem is, as BP98 point out, that while
for relatively small values of kthe critical values increase markedly when an additional
break is added, for k5 the critical values are quite ﬂat in k. The effect is that if the true
number of breaks is relatively large, the sequential testing procedure may detect even
more breaks. As a result, the estimated number of breaks can sometimes be very large,
and this is also what we ﬁnd. In fact, the number of breaks is always estimated to kmax,
regardless of how we set this tuning parameter. These estimates are therefore not reliable.
On the other hand, the exact choice of kto use in the estimation of (2.1) should not
matter too much, as long as kis chosen large enough to cover all relevant breaks. Unre-
ported results suggest that the estimation results for bandd1, ...,dk+1are quite sensitive
to changes in kfor small values of k, in that the estimate of dk+1is markedly different
from that of dk, and the estimates of bfrom one value of kto another differ too. As kin-
creases, however, these differences tend to become smaller and from k=7 onward they
are almost completely absent. The fact that the estimated coefﬁcients are stable after k=7
suggests that with this many breaks at least the model is not underspeciﬁed. Hence, in
what follows, we employ seven breaks.
31

INSERT TABLE 3ABOUT HERE
Table 3 reports the estimated breakpoints and the associated 95% conﬁdence interval
for each of the seven breaks. The breaks are precisely estimated, having very narrow con-
ﬁdence intervals covering only a few quarters before and after, which is partly expected
given the size of the sample. The estimated breakpoints for total and RE loans coincide,
and are very similar to those for C&I loans.
Of direct interest are the estimated break dates, which all coincide with major (QE)
events. The ﬁrst break takes place at about the same time as the ﬁrst signs of the global
ﬁnancial crisis became visible. On February 27, 2007, stock prices in China and the US
fell by the most since 2003 as reports of a decline in home prices and durable goods or-
ders led to growth fears, with former chairman of the Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan
predicting a recession. The second and seventh breaks coincide with the start of QE1 and
QE4, respectively, which were the largest QE rounds. The third break coincides with the
announcement of Operation Twist. The fourth and ﬁfth breaks coincide with the tapering
and the end of QE3, respectively. The sixth break is estimated close to the start of Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet normalisation programme.
Another major point about the breakpoints reported in Table 3 is that they are not
the same as the conventional QE dates employed in the literature. Indeed, while the
starting dates of QE1 and QE3 are within the 95% conﬁdence intervals for the second and
fourth breaks, respectively, and the end date of QE3 is within the interval for the ﬁfth,
the end of QE1 is not included, as is the entire QE2. It therefore seems as that some of
the conventional QE dates have been labelled as breaks when in fact they are not. This
ﬁnding is largely consistent with studies such as Kapoor and Peia (2021), Rodnyansky
and Darmouni (2017), and Luck and Zimmermann (2020), which all point to a relatively
stronger impact of QE1 and QE3 on lending. More importantly, a number of the dates
that we identify as breaks are not among the conventional QE dates. This means that one
should interpret existing results based on the standard DiD approach with caution, since
32

the possibility remains that they are due in part to omitted structural breaks.
4.4. Model estimation
With the estimated breaks in hand we turn to the estimation of (2.1), which we repa-
rameterize in the following way:
yi,t=x0
i,tb+k0+1
å
j=11(Tj<tTj+1)w0
i,tdj+ei,t
=x0
i,tb+w0
i,td1+k0
å
j=11(t>Tj)w0
i,tDj+ei,t, (4.1)
where t=1, ..., T,Dj=dj+1 djis as in Section 3.2 and 1 (A)is the indicator function
for the event Ataking the value one if Ais true and zero otherwise. The reason for why
we use this parametrization is because at the end of a QE intervention, the Federal Re-
serve’s balance sheet does not return to its pre-intervention levels, and therefore price
effects remain. Therefore, it is not meaningful to compare say, bank lending behaviour
after QE3 with bank lending behaviour before QE1 to determine the effectiveness of QE3,
but rather we should compare post-QE3 behaviour to pre-QE3 behaviour. The reparame-
terized model in (4.1) with d1,D1, ...,Dk0as opposed to d1, ...,dk0+1as coefﬁcients captures
this.
According to theory, QE should cause increased lending by banks. The intuition goes
as follows. The Federal Reserve purchases MBSs and Treasuries that are held by banks.
Banks sell some of their holdings in these securities to the Federal Reserve, and this in-
creases their reserves.6On the other hand, unsold holdings increase in value because
of the increased demand.7Both the increased reserves and the higher valued MBS and
Treasury holdings improve the ﬁnancial condition of banks, which means that they can
increase their lending. Hence, in terms of (4.1), we expect Djto be positive following a
6Increased lending brought about by increases in banks’ reserves is called the “mortgage origination
channel” by Chakraborty et al. (2020) or the “liquidity channel” by Darmouni and Rodnyanski (2017).
7This is what Rodnyansky and Darmouni (2017) refer to as the “net worth channel”.
33

QE intervention.
As outlined in Section 2, the bank-level regressors in xi,tand wi,tare augmented with
their cross-section averages to account for interactive effects, and, as mentioned earlier,
GDP and inﬂation growth are included as observed common factors. The loadings of all
these factors are assumed to be time-invariant, which rules out the possibility of policy-
induced breaks. In the previous literature it is quite common to allow QE to affect the
overall level of lending (see, for example, Kapoor and Peia, 2021, and Rodnyansky and
Darmouni, 2017). We do more. In particular, a breaking constant is included, which
is equivalent to allowing for breaking bank ﬁxed affects. This type of breaking observed
factors is easily accommodated. In fact, all one has to do is to organize the breaking factors
by regime similarly to ¯W(Tk), and append it to ¯Z(Tk). All-in-all, we include px+pw=
6 averages and three observed factors, which means that we can allow for up to nine
common factors where one is potentially breaking. This should be more than enough to
capture the unobserved heterogeneity of bank lending.
INSERT TABLE 4ABOUT HERE
The estimation results for each loan category are reported in Table 4.8We begin by con-
sidering the results for total loans. The effect of banks’ MBS and non-MBS holdings tend
to have the same sign, which we interpret as that Federal Reserve’s purchases of MBSs
and Treasuries work in the same direction. We also see that bank lending is generally
not affected by the exact holding mix. One exception is in the ﬁrst and second regimes,
which coincide with the pre-crisis and ﬁnancial crisis periods, respectively. In particular,
while the estimated effects are of the same sign, only banks’ non-MBS holdings enter sig-
niﬁcantly. The fact that it is only banks’ non-MBS holdings that matters is expected given
Figure 1. The estimated effect of these holdings is positive in the ﬁrst regime (that is, d1is
estimated to be positive), suggesting that increased Treasury purchases by the Federal Re-
8The Stata command xtdcce2 by Ditzen (2018) was used to obtain the regression results.
34

serve caused banks to increase lending, which is just as expected given the discussion of
the previous paragraph. But then in the second regime the sign changes to negative (that
is,D1is estimated to be negative), which means that the estimated effect of banks’ non-
MBS holdings on their lending decreases signiﬁcantly when compared to the ﬁrst regime.
This last effect can be explained by considering the health of the banking sector, as we
describe in detail below. The effect of banks’ MBS holdings on lending decreases too, al-
though not signiﬁcantly so. The holding mix therefore matters here. From this point on,
however, the estimated effect is basically the same regardless of the type of holding being
considered, suggesting that the mix is unimportant. We also see that for quite some time
following the crisis the estimated effect of banks’ MBS and non-MBS holdings on lend-
ing is either insigniﬁcant or signiﬁcantly negative, suggesting that the impact of Federal
Reserve’s purchases of MBSs and Treasuries on lending is either the same as during the
crisis or even more negative. This development is brought to a halt at the time of the ﬁfth
break (the end of QE3) when the estimated effect of banks’ MBS and non-MBS holdings
on lending increases signiﬁcantly when compared to previous quarters, which is consis-
tent with the results of Luck and Zimmermann (2020). This increase continues until the
end of the sample period.
As a measure of the overall effect of QE on lending, we look at the difference be-
tween the ﬁrst (pre-intervention) regime and the last (QE4) regime, as given by åk0
j=1Dj=
dk0+1 d1. The overall effect for MBS and non-MBS holdings are estimated to 0.165 and
0.007, respectively. This is when we ignore coefﬁcient estimates that are insigniﬁcant. If
we include all estimates, said effects are  0.118 and 0.115, respectively. Hence, even if
in the latter part QE seems to have worked, considering the full sample period QE has
not been very effective in spurring credit ﬂow.
INSERT FIGURE 2ABOUT HERE
In order to ease the interpretation of the results reported in Table 4, in Figure 2 we
plot the average Tier 1 risk based capital ratio, which is an indicator of banks’ ﬁnancial
35

strength and is regulated by Basel III. Between 2008Q2 and 2014Q4 this ratio is increasing
steeply, suggesting that banks retain some of the reserves produced by Federal Reserve’s
purchases in order to improve their ﬁnancial position. This explains why in this period
lending does not increase. The Tier 1 ratio ﬂattens after 2014Q4, only to increase again
in 2020Q1. The fact that in the 2014Q4–2020Q1-period the Tier 1 ratio is relatively stable
means that banks are no longer building up reserves to the same extent as before. Banks
therefore have more room to expand lending, and this is reﬂected in the estimation results.
The observed increase in the Tier 1 ratio after 2020Q1 is compensated in part by the scale
of Federal Reserve’s purchases during QE4. Banks are therefore able to expand lending
while at the same time cover their capitalisation needs. The importance of banks’ ﬁnancial
position for their ability to lend is consistent with studies such as Kim and Sohn (2017).
The above conclusions for total loans apply also to RE loans. In fact, the estimation
results are almost identical, except that the contractionary effect of the crisis is more pro-
nounced for RE than for total loans. The results for C&I loans are quite different, though.
Note in particular how in the second (ﬁnancial crisis) regime banks’ MBS and non-MBS
holdings are no longer signiﬁcant, and that the positive effect in the sixth (end of QE3)
regime is much stronger than for total and RE loans. This last difference corroborates
the ﬁnding of Luck and Zimmermann (2020) that C&I lending has not been very respon-
sive to QE, except post-QE3 when it increases. It also strengthens our conclusion that it
is mainly from the ﬁfth break onwards that Federal Reserve’s interventions have lead to
increased lending. The overall effects of MBS and non-MBS holdings on C&I lending are
estimated to 0.032 and 0.701, respectively, suggesting that while Federal Reserve’s MBS
purchases have again not been very effective, its Treasury purchases has had a substantial
effect, which consistent with the ﬁndings of Chakraborty et al. (2020). It is also consis-
tent with the Figure 1 and the massive increase in Federal Reserve’s Treasuries holdings
during QE4.
36